.Dd August 26, 2024
.Dt HOME 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm home ,
.Nm sabia
.Nd introduction to maintenance and operation of seninha's personal computer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Bd -literal
kern.ostype=OpenBSD
kern.hostname=sabia
hw.machine=amd64
hw.model=Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3320M CPU @ 2.60GHz
hw.vendor=LENOVO
hw.version=ThinkPad T430
hw.product=23501M2
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm sabia
is the OpenBSD system on my ThinkPad T430.
It is my main personal computer.
.Pp
Hostnames for my machines are chosen after native brazilian birds.
.Qq Em Sabiá
.Pq Em Turdus rufiventris
is the official national bird symbol of Brazil.
.Ss Hardware
.Nm sabia
runs on a LENOVO ThinkPad T430 model 23501M2,
with i5-3320M (@2.60GHz) amd64 CPU.
.Pp
It features the following modifications.
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
A serial Ultrabay Enhanced HDD Adapter installed in place of the original DVD optical drive.
.It
A classic (xx20) keyboard installed in place of the original chiclete-style keyboard
.Po
by sanding down the nubs to fit in the palmrest
.Pc .
I have not flashed the BIOS to make the keyboard work from boot;
but I use xkbcomp(1) to set the keymap on X11.
.It
A black faux leather vinyl adhesive wrapped around the top lid.
.It
A KingSener battery in place of the original battery.
.El
.Ss Operating system
The administrator user, created at instalation,
must be in the following groups and login class.
Run
.Xr usermod 8
to configure, and
.Xr userinfo 8
to make sure.
.Bl -tag -compact -width "XXXXXXXXX"
.It Dv _shutdown
Group for machine power (shutdown) privileges.
.It Dv dialer
Group for terminal devices privileges.
.It Dv operator
Group for machine disk privileges.
.It Dv wheel
Group for administrative privileges.
.It Dv wobj
Group for building privileges.
.It Dv staff
Login class for higher resources usage.
.El
.Pp
.Pa /etc/doas.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
## Allow wheel by default:
permit persist setenv { \e
	-DISPLAY -ENV PATH PAGER LESS EDITOR VISUAL \e
} :wheel

## Separate privileges when fetching/building ports:
permit keepenv nopass :wsrc as _pfetch
permit keepenv nopass :wobj as _pbuild
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/mk.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
## Cache compiled objects for faster recompilation (requires devel/ccache):
USE_CCACHE =	Yes

## Build ports as ${BUILD_USER} and fetch distfiles as ${FETCH_USER}
PORTS_PRIVSEP =	Yes
SUDO =		/usr/bin/doas

## Set additional warning flags when compiling:
#WARNINGS =	Yes
#CDIAGFLAGS =	-Wall -Wpointer-arith -Wuninitialized -Wstrict-prototypes \
#		-Wmissing-prototypes -Wunused -Wsign-compare -Wshadow

.include "/usr/ports/infrastructure/templates/mk.conf.template"
.Ed
.Pp
Installed packages:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ImageMagick             hexchat                 quirks
armagetronad            isync                   rlwrap
bubblemon-dockapp       keepassxc               sfeed
clang-tools-extra       links+                  shellcheck
dillo                   maim                    supertuxkart
djview4                 mblaze                  tdesktop
dsda-doom               mediainfo               uim
entr                    megatools               unclutter
feh                     moreutils               ungoogled-chromium
ffmpegthumbnailer       mpc                     unifont
freefont-ttf            mpd                     vim
gbdfed                  mpv                     wmapm
gimp                    msmtp                   wmclock
git-x11                 mutt                    wpa_supplicant
gnupg                   nsxiv                   xbmbrowser
got                     picom                   zathura-djvu
graphviz                pkglocatedb             zathura-pdf-mupdf
gv                      poppler-utils           zathura-ps
heirloom-doctools       qemu
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
apmd_flags=-L -z 15
dhcpd_flags=
pkg_scripts=mpd
sndiod_flags=-s default -m play,rec,mon -s mon
sshd_flags=NO
unwind_flags=
vmd_flags=
xenodm_flags=
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/sysctl.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#kern.audio.record=1
#kern.video.record=1
net.inet.ip.forwarding=1
net.inet6.ip6.forwarding=1

# enable simultaneous multithreading (+performance, -security)
hw.smt=1
.Ed
.Ss Interactive shell
I use
.Xr ksh 1
as interactive shell.
It is initialized by the following scripts:
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
.Pa /etc/ksh.kshrc
.It
.Pa $HOME/.profile
.It
.Pa $HOME/.kshrc
.El
.Pp
The following commands are provided on interactive shells only:
.Bl -tag -width COMMAND -compact
.It Ic cp , mv , rm
Aliases for interactive and verbose forms of file management commands.
.It Ic fuck
Re-runs previous non-doas command with
.Xr doas 1
or retry previous doas command.
.It Ic lc , ls , ll
Columnated/single-line/long-format directory listing.
.It Ic run
Run command in background, ignoring its standard and error outputs.
.It Ic see
Shows what is passing through a pipe
.Pq Ql "foo | see | bar" .
.El
.Pp
The built-in command
.Ic cd
is replaced with a homonym function which adds the following features:
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
.Sq Ql "cd ..../foo/bar"
goes up that much dots, and then
.Pa foo/bar .
.It
.Sq Ql "cd ..proj"
goes up to the first directory containing
.Dq Sy proj
in its name.
.It
When changing into a directory with a
.Pa Makefile ,
set its targets as completions for
.Xr make 1 .
.El
.Ss X11 session
I use
.Xr shod 1
as X11 window manager.
Its main feature is the ability to tile and tab windows inside floating containers.
Shod can be controlled via mouse (by drag-and-dropping windows' titlebars)
and via X11 client messages (through a client called
.Xr shodc 1 ) .
Shod also displays a dock where dockapps can be placed.
.Pp
I use a variation of the Brazilian ABNT-2 layout which lacks the physical key for the
.Sy "slash/question"
symbol.
It is configured in
.Pa "~/.xkeymap"
and set with
.Xr xkbcomp 1 .
Rather than a four level key symbol system (Normal, Shift, AltGr, Shift+AltGr)
I use only two layers of key symbols, complemented with dead keys
(for Portuguese symbols I use regularly, like accented letters and cedilla),
and the compose key
(for drawing characters, greek letters, mathematical symbols, ligatures, etc).
.Pp
The following illustrations describes the normal and shifted key symbols.
Postscript versions of those ilustrations can be generated with
.Xr xkbrint 1 .
.bp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
┌───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬────────┐
│esc│ 1 │ 2 │ 3 │ 4 │ 5 │ 6 │ 7 │ 8 │ 9 │ 0 │ - │ = │ bkspc  │
├───┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬──────┤
│ tab │ q │ w │ e │ r │ t │ y │ u │ i │ o │ p │ ' │ [ │enter │
├─────┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┐     │
│ ctrl │ a │ s │ d │ f │ g │ h │ j │ k │ l │ / │ ~ │ ] │     │
├────┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴───┴─────┤
│shft│ \e │ z │ x │ c │ v │ b │ n │ m │ , │ . │ ; │ shift     │
├───┬┴───┼───┼───┼───┴───┴───┴───┴───┼───┼───┼───┼───┬───┬───┤
│fn │caps│win│alt│       space       │mlt│hom│end│pup│up │pdw│
└───┴────┴───┴───┴───────────────────┴───┴───┴───┼───┼───┼───┤
                                                 │lft│dw │rgt│
                                                 └───┴───┴───┘
┌───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬───┬────────┐
│esc│ ! │ " │ # │ $ │ % │ @ │ & │ * │ ( │ ) │ _ │ + │ bkspc  │
├───┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬──────┤
│ tab │ Q │ W │ E │ R │ T │ Y │ U │ I │ O │ P │ ` │ { │enter │
├─────┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┬──┴┐     │
│ ctrl │ A │ S │ D │ F │ G │ H │ J │ K │ L │ ? │ ^ │ } │     │
├────┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴─┬─┴───┴─────┤
│shft│ | │ Z │ X │ C │ V │ B │ N │ M │ < │ > │ : │ shift     │
├───┬┴───┼───┼───┼───┴───┴───┴───┴───┼───┼───┼───┼───┬───┬───┤
│fn │caps│win│alt│       space       │mlt│hom│end│pup│up │pdw│
└───┴────┴───┴───┴───────────────────┴───┴───┴───┼───┼───┼───┤
                                                 │lft│dw │rgt│
                                                 └───┴───┴───┘
.Ed
.Ss Network
I aggregate both the wired
.Xr em 4
interface and the wireless
.Xr iwn 4
interfaces on a
.Xr trunk 4
failover interface which connects to whichever is available.
I also create a
.Xr vether 4
virtual network for connecting with virtual machines,
and two
.Xr bridge 4
interfaces for forwarding traffic to virtual machines
(one from the aggregator interface,
and the other from the virtual interface).
For the
.Xr bridge 4
interfaces to work, I enable IP forwarding at
.Xr systcl.conf 5 ,
and configure a NAT at
.Xr pf.conf 5 .
.Pp
.Pa /etc/hostname.em0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
up
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/hostname.iwn0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
join "my nwid" wpakey "my password"
up
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/hostname.trunk0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
trunkproto failover
trunkport em0
trunkport iwn0
inet autoconf
inet6 autoconf
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/hostname.vether0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
inet 10.0.0.1 255.255.255.0
up
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/hostname.bridge0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
add vether0
up
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/hostname.bridge1 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
add trunk0
up
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/sysctl.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
net.inet.ip.forwarding=1
net.inet6.ip6.forwarding=1
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/pf.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
set block-policy drop
set skip on lo

# block stateless traffic; establish keep-state
block return
pass

# sanitize incoming packets
match in all scrub (no-df random-id max-mss 1440)
antispoof log quick for egress

# block all egress incomming traffic
block in log on egress proto { tcp udp }
pass in on egress from egress:network to egress:broadcast

# allow ICMP (ping) for MTU discovery
pass in proto icmp

# Port build user does not need network
block out log proto {tcp udp} user _pbuild

# VMs can talk to the Internet
match out on egress from vport0:network to any nat-to (egress)

# VMs can resolve names with unwind(8)
pass in proto { tcp udp } from vport0:network to any port domain \
	rdr-to localhost port domain

# allow reaching the outside (IPv4 + IPv6)
pass out inet
pass out inet6
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/unwind.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
forwarder { 194.242.2.4 DoT }
preference { DoT }
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa /etc/dhcpd.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# vether(4) subnet; used for virtual machines
# Network:	10.0.0.0/24
# Addresses:	10.0.0.64 ~ 10.0.0.127
# Router:	10.0.0.1
# Name server:	10.0.0.1
subnet 10.0.0.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 {
	range 10.0.0.128 10.0.0.254;
	option routers 10.0.0.1;
}
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are set by the
.Pa ~/.profile
script.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CACHEDIR
Cache directory.
(Set to
.Pa "$HOME/var/cache" . )
.It Ev ENV
Path to ksh's rc file.
(Set to
.Pa "$HOME/.kshrc" . )
.It Ev EDITOR
Default editor program.
(Set to
.Pa "vim" . )
.It Ev GNUPGHOME
Configuration directory for
.Xr gpg 1 .
(Set to
.Pa "$HOME/var/gpg" . )
.It Ev LANG , LC_CTYPE , LC_COLLATE
Locale
(Set to
.Dq Sy pt_BR.UTF-8 ,
except for encoding and collation/ordering,
which is
.Dq Sy C.UTF-8 . )
.It Ev MANPATH
Path to look for manual pages.
.It Ev OPENER
Default file opener program.
(Set to
.Pa "plumb" . )
.It Ev PAGER
Default pager program.
(Set to
.Pa "less" . )
.It Ev TERMCMD
Default terminal emulator program.
(Set to
.Pa "xterm" . )
.It Ev TZ
Timezone.
(Set to
.Sy "America/Sao_Paulo" . )
.It Ev VISUAL
Default editor program.
(Set to
.Pa "vim" . )
.It Ev XDG_CACHE_HOME
xdg shit
(Set to
.Pa "$HOME/.cache" . )
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
xdg shit
(Set to
.Pa "$HOME/.config" . )
.It Ev XDG_DATA_HOME
xdg shit
(Set to
.Pa "$HOME/.data" . )
.El
.Sh FILES
This is a personal computer;
there is no human user or operator orther than me.
Thus, I make no point to keep files only at my
.Ev $HOME
directory:
I save files elsewhere, when needed.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /home/
That's my
.Ev $HOME
directory
(why should be a single directory there
.Pq Pa /home/seninha/
for the single user?).
Each project has a subdirectory in it.
For example,
.Pa /home/shod/
is for
.Xr shod 1 ;
.Pa /home/c/
is for notes on The C Programming Language; etc.
.It Pa /home/doc/
Directory where I archive documents.
It contains mostly non-fiction books and videos of lectures.
But I also archive there RPG books and fiction (both in book and movie formats).
.It Pa /home/mem/
Meme directory.
.It Pa /home/mus/
Music directory.
Organized as
.Pa "ARTIST/YEAR - ALBUM/TRACK - TITLE.flac" .
.It Pa /home/tmp/
Directory where I dump stuff.
It contains mostly downloaded files.
I try to keep it clean, but most of the time it is a mess.
.It Pa /usr/home/
Hierarchy for personal utilities and applications.
Different from the
.Pa /usr/local/
hierarchy, this one is owned by the
.Sy operator
group, which I am part of;
so I can add files to it without super-user powers.
.It Pa /usr/home/bin
.Ev $PATH
entry with executables for personal utilities and applications.
.It Pa /usr/home/man
.Ev $MANPATH
entry with manuals for personal utilities and applications.
.It Pa /var/
Directory for files managed automatically by applications.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr afterboot 8 ,
.Xr intro 8 ,
.Xr security 8 ,
for introduction on system maintenance and operation.
.Pp
.Xr crash 8 ,
.Xr dump 8 ,
.Xr restore 8 ,
for system backup/recovery.
.Pp
.Xr netstart 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 8 ,
.Xr rc.d 8 ,
.Xr rc.shutdown 8 ,
.Xr rcctl 8 ,
for services and daemons.
.Sh TODO
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
Describe my mail/news workflow.
.It
Describe my text editor workflow.
.It
Describe backup workflow.
.It
Describe theme.
.It
Replace monospace font/typeface with one
with wide unicode range and consistent math symbols.
Also scalable.
.It
Replace wallpaper and colorscheme for shod (window border and dock)
with ones that matches the beige-ish light color of XTerm.
.It
Rewrite shod.
.It
Rewrite xprompt.
.It
In
.Xr paginator 1 :
implement XDND protocol partially,
so dragging over a desktop miniature changes the desktop,
so it can be dropped over a window a different desktop from the drag origin.
(The same can be applied to
.Xr taskinator 1 ) .
.It
In
.Xr taskinator 1 :
show window name; and
group windows by application (like in BeOS/Haiku).
.It
Write a dockapp application for drag-and-drop target.
.It
Add a system monitor desklet
.Po
maybe
.Xr conky 1 ?
.Pc
.It
Use
.Xr pidgin 1
(or another libpurple client)
to replace hexchat, telegram and whatnot.
.El
