.Dd July 23, 2024
.Dt REMBER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rember
.Nd quick reference for stuff I forgor
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Whatsapp
URLs to force Zapzap® to use its webapp rather than ask for the desktop application:
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
.Lk https://web.whatsapp.com/accept?code=GROUP_ID
.It
.Lk https://web.whatsapp.com/send?phone=PHONE
.El
.
.Ss Online accounts
Get rid of webshit:
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
.Lk https://justgetmydata.com
.It
.Lk https://justdeleteme.xyz
.El
.
.Ss Archives
In web.archive.org, add an
.Qq Dv "if_"
after the date to remove that annoying topbar that is bad rendered in old/non-js browsers.
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
.Lk "https://web.archive.org/web/20010911081300/example.org"
.Pq with topbar
.It
.Lk "https://web.archive.org/web/20010911081300if_/example.org"
.Pq plain site; no topbar
.El
.
.Pp
Other web archives:
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
.Lk "https://desuarchive.org"
.Pq "for /g/ and a few other 4chun boards"
.It
.Lk "https://archive.today"
.It
.Lk "https://wiki.archiveteam.org"
.Pq "wiki of archives" .
.El
.
.Ss Recursive webdump
Recursivelly find and download all
.Xr jpeg 5
photos linkable from Stallman's website homepage:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ wget -r -nc -np -A jpg,jpeg https://stallman.org
.Ed
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "XXXXX" -compact
.It Fl A , R
Comma-separated list of accepted/rejected file patterns or suffixes.
.It Fl nc
Ignore already downloaded files (no-clobber).
.It Fl nd
(Optional) do not create directory hierarchy when retrieving recursively.
.It Fl np
Do not ever ascend to the parent directory when retrieving recursively
(no-parent).
.It Fl r
Recursive.
.El
.
.Ss Wiki dump
Save an article from wikipedia (or other mediawiki site) in mediawiki format.
Use
.Xr pandoc 1
to convert from
.Fl f Cm mediawiki
to
.Fl t Cm plain
text.
Check
.Lk "https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Export"
for more information.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ curl "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php" \e
	--data-urlencode action=raw \e
	--data-urlencode title="Cock and ball torture"
.Ed
.
.Ss Hacking
Generate patch in
.Xr mbox 5
format between the git commits
.Ic "HEAD^\)"
.Po
.Ic HEAD Ns "'s"
parent
.Pc
and
.Ic HEAD :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ git format-patch --stdout HEAD^..HEAD | save file.diff
.Ed
.
.Pp
Generate patch:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ diff -up path/to/original-dir/ path/to/modified-dir/
.Ed
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Fl p
Prefix sections with header (function prototypes in C).
.It Fl u
Unified contextual diff format.
.El
.
.Pp
Apply patch (replace
.Qq Dv 1
with the number of leading directory from path to strip):
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
$ patch -p1 <path/to/patch.diff
.Ed
.
.Ss Compare file hierarchy
Compare the tree (file hierarchy) rooted in
.Pa /foo/peepee
with the tree rooted in
.Pa /bar/poopoo :
for files with the same name and size:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
$ mtree -c -k size -p /foo/peepee | mtree -p /bar/poopoo
.Ed
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "XXXXXXX" -compact
.It Fl c
Creates a tree specification
(without it, compares a tree against a tree specification).
.It Fl k Cm size
Specifies what to compare (can be size, cksum, time, etc).
.It Fl p
Specifies a directory to use rather than current one.
.El
.
.Ss Using arduino makefile
I have an Arduino MEGA on my drawer which may never see the light of sun again.
To play with it (before puting it away for one more year), install
.Pa devel/arduino-makefile
and write this Makefile:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
BOARD_TAG = mega
BOARD_SUB = atmega2560
include /usr/local/share/arduino-makefile/Arduino.mk
.Ed
.
.Ss Writing port
.Bl -enum -width "XX"
.It
Create the port directory and copy into it the template
.Pa Makefile .
Fill in descriptional variables
.Ev CATEGORIES
and
.Ev COMMENT .
.Bd -literal -compact
install -d -m 644 \e
/usr/ports/infrastructure/templates/Makefile.template \e
/usr/ports/<CATEGORY>/<PKGNAME>/Makefile
.Ed
.It
Write a long description at
.Pa pkg/DESCR .
.It
Fill in fetch data.
Distfile is fetched from
.Pa "${SITES}${DISTNAME}${EXTRACT_SUFX}" .
A few special dist sources have special variables:
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
Use predefined
.Ev SITES
from
.Pa /usr/ports/infrastructure/db/network.conf .
For example,
.Qq Li "SITES = ${SITE_SOURCEFORGE}" .
.It
For code forges, define
.Ev DIST_TUPLE
like
.Qq Li "github phillbush xfiles v2.0.0 .\)" .
.El
.It
Create a checksum in
.Pa distinfo
and extract
.Ev DISTFILE :
.Bd -literal -compact
make makesum
make extract
.Ed
.It
Define
.Ev PERMIT_PACKAGE
and
.Ev PERMIT_DISTFILES
to
.Qq Li "Yes"
if license permits redistributing binary/source files.
.It
Define configuring and building variables
.Ev MODULES ,
.Ev CONFIGURE_ARGS ,
and
.Ev MAKE_FLAGS .
.It
Try to build.
Write patches as needed, with a short summary if possible.
.Bd -literal -compact
until make build
do
	cd `make show=WRKSRC`
	cp foo/bar.c{,.orig.port}
	vi foo/bar.c
	cd -
	make update-patches
done
.Ed
.It
If the package needs to create a user or group, choose the lowest free id at
.Pa /usr/ports/infrastructure/db/user.list .
.It
Install the program:
.Bd -literal -compact
make fake
.Ed
.It
Generate
.Pa pkg/PLIST :
.Bd -literal -compact
make update-plist
.Ed
.It
Fill in dependention variables
.Ev TEST_DEPENDS ,
.Ev RUN_DEPENDS ,
.Ev LIB_DEPENDS ,
and
.Ev WANTLIB .
Library dependencies can be checked with:
.Bd -literal -compact
make port-lib-depends-check
.Ed
.It
Check for regression tests
.Po
if the package has no test infrastructure, define
.Qq Li "NO_TEST=Yes"
.Pc :
.Bd -literal -compact
make test
.Ed
.It
Check for package validation before submitting:
.Bd -literal -compact
/usr/ports/infrastructure/bin/portcheck
.Ed
.It
???
.It
Profit.
.El
.
.Ss NetHack
On Gnomish Mines
.Bl -enum -compact -width ""
.It
Explore the first(s) level(s).
Grab a dwarvish mithril-coat, pick-axe, helmet, boots, and daggers
from somebody there.
.It
Go to the Oracle level and gain experience along the way.
.It
Go back to the mines and continue to the end.
.El
.
.Pp
Engrave
.Pq Ic "E"
.Qq Elbereth
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
In hallways.
.It
Near stairs.
.It
On a trail leading back to stairs.
.It
While waiting HP to recover.
.It
With hard gemstones,
for semi-durable engraving.
NOTE: This is slow.
.El
.
.Pp
Avoiding starvation.
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
Eat fresh corpses to avoid food poisioning.
(60 turns is the limit).
.It
Lichens, lizards, and corpses kept in an ice box do not age.
.It
Zombies and other undead are always poisoned.
.It
Keep eggs and tripe rations for pets, unless in emergencies.
.El
.
.Pp
On testing.
.Bl -bullet -compact -width ""
.It
Use pets for curse-testing.
(If the pet refuses to step on an item, it is cursed).
.It
Do not test scrolls, potions, or wands to identify them.
.It
Testing armor, weapons, and amulets (if non cursed) is safe.
.It
Never test near a shop or a pet.
.It
Drop scrolls at a shop and multiply the shopkeeper's offer by 2~3 to get the base price.
The scroll of identify is the most easily recognizable, the most common, and the cheapest
(base price of $20).
.It
On Sokoban,
there's two scrolls of earth (creates boulders) on the first level,
and a scroll of scare monster on the prize.
.It
If a pet, shopkeeper, or peaceful monster "turns to flee" for no apparent reason,
you are standing on a scroll of scare monster.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr home 8
